." $Id: Tabs.man,v 1.1 2001-11-30 00:42:10 granger Exp $
." view with "tbl | nroff -man"
."
.TH "Tabs" 3 "June 1998" "Version 1.0" ""
.SH NAME
Tabs
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Tabs widget manages one or more child widgets, only one of which is
visible at any time.  Along the top of the Tabs widget are a series of
tabs which the user may use to select which child widget is visible.
.P
When the user selects a tab, that widget becomes visible, while all others
are obscured.  In addition, any callback functions specified by the program
will be called to notify the program that the specific child has been made
visible.

.SH CLASS
Compound => Constraint => Tabs

Tabs does not require any specific widget set, and may be combined with
any other widget set.

.SH RESOURCES

.ps -2
.TS
center box;
cBsss
lB|lB|lB|lB
l|l|l|l.
Tabs
Name	Class	Type	Default
font	Font	XFontStruct *	XtDefaultFont
internalWidth	InternalWidth	Dimension	4
internalHeight	InternalHeight	Dimension	2
topWidget	TopWidget	Widget
callback	Callback	XtCallbackList	NULL
popdownCallback	Callback	XtCallbackList	NULL
selectInsensitive	SelectInsensitive	Boolean	True
beNiceToColormap	BeNiceToColormap	Boolean	False
topShadowContrast	TopShadowContrast	int	20
bottomShadowContrast	BottomShadowContrast	int	40
insensitiveContrast	InsensitiveContrast	int	33
.TE
.ps +2

.LP
See the \fBCore\fP widget for more resources.

.SS Descriptions.

.TP
.I Font
Font used to draw tab labels.

.TP
.I InternalWidth, InternalHeight
Specifies the margins around the text.

.TP
.I TopWidget
The child widget currently displayed on top.  Setting this attribute
is equivalent to calling XawTabsSetTop()

.TP
.I Callback
Function to call when the user selects a tab.  Prototype:
callbackProc(Widget tabs, XtPointer client, XtPointer call_data).
Call_data is the child widget which has been selected; cast to type
Widget.

.TP
.I PopdownCallback
Function to call when the user selects a tab.  Prototype:
callbackProc(Widget tabs, XtPointer client, XtPointer call_data).
Call_data is the child widget which was previously visible, and
which will now become invisible.

.TP
.I SelectInsensitive
Boolean value, determins if the user may select tabs belonging to
insensitive child widgets.

.TP
.I BeNiceToColormap
Boolean.  When true, Tabs widget allocates fewer colors for itself.

.TP
.I InsensitiveContrast.
Determines how "grey" insensitive tabs appear.  0-100.


.SH CONSTRAINT RESOURCES

Constraint resources are set for the individual child widgets.

.ps -2
.TS
center box;
cBsss
lB|lB|lB|lB
l|l|l|l.
Tabs Constraints
Name	Class	Type	Default
tabLabel	Label	String	widget name
tabLeftBitmap	LeftBitmap	Pixmap	None
tabForeground	Foreground	Pixel	XtDefaultForeground
resizable	Resizable	Boolean	False
.TE
.ps +2

.SS Descriptions.

.TP
.I TabLabel
The label to be used for the tab.

.TP
.I TabLeftBitmap
Specifies the bitmap to be displayed to the left of the label.

.TP
.I TabForeground
Specifies the color used for the bitmap and the label.

.TP
.I Resizable
Specifies whether or not the child widget may be resized.

.SH FUNCTIONS

.TP
.B void XawTabsSetTop(Widget w, Boolean callCallbacks)
Causes the specified child widget to become the top widget in its Tab group.
If the specified widget's parent is not a Tabs widget, nothing happens.

.SH BUGS

Internal computations are O(n^2).  After about 100 child widgets are
created, geometry changes become quite slow.


.SH AUTHOR
Edward Falk <falk@falconer.vip.best.com>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1998 by Edward A. Falk.  This widget may be used freely in any
free software.  Source code is freely distributable provided that my name
is not removed from it.
