Note: This document is excerpted from the USGS Web site page:

    http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/glis/hyper/guide/1_dgr_dem.supplement#1_dgr.sup1



Background 
==========

A Digital Elevation Model (DEM), consists of a sampled array of elevations
for ground positions that are normally at regularly spaced intervals. The
1-Degree DEM (3- by 3-arc-second data spacing) provides coverage in 1- by
1-degree blocks for all of the contiguous United States, Hawaii, and
limited portions of Alaska. The basic elevation model is produced by or for
the Defense Mapping Agency (DMA), but is distributed by the USGS, EROS Data
Center, in the DEM data record format. In reformatting the product the USGS
does not change the basic elevation information. 1-degree DEM's are also
referred to as "3-arc second" or "1:250,000 scale" DEM data.


Data Characteristics 
====================

The 1-degree DEM consists of a regular array of elevations referenced
horizontally on the geographic (latitude/longitude) coordinate system of
the WGS 72 (to be converted to WGS 84). The information content is
approximately equivalent to that which can be derived from contour
information represented on 1:250,000 scale maps.

The unit of coverage is a 1- x 1- degree block. Elevation data on the
integer degree lines (all four sides) overlap with the corresponding
profiles on the surrounding eight blocks.

Elevations are in meters relative to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929 (NGVD 29) in the continental U.S.  and local mean sea level in
Hawaii. DEM accuracy information is provided below.

The 1-degree DEM mosaic data set is characteristically the same as the
source 1- by 1-degree DEM unit of coverage.


Spatial Resolution 
==================

Spacing of the elevations along and between each profile is 3-arc seconds
with 1,201 elevations per profile. The exception is DEM data in Alaska,
where the spacing and number of elevations per profile varies depending on
the latitudinal location of the DEM. Latitudes between 50 and 70 degrees
North have spacings at 6 arc seconds with 601 elevations per profile and
latitudes greater than 70 degrees North have spacings at 9 arc seconds with
401 elevations per profile.

The 1-degree mosaic data set spacing of elevation and profile data is the
same as the 1-degree DEM conterminous U.S. data.


Data Organization 
=================

A DEM file is organized into three logical records: 

 Type A   contains information defining the general
          characteristics of the DEM, including DEM
          name, boundaries, units of measurement,
          minimum and maximum elevations, projection
          parameters, and number of type B records.
          Each DEM file has one Type A record.

 Type B   contains profiles of elevation data and
          associated header information.  Each profile
          has a Type B record.

 Type C   contains statistics on the accuracy of the
          data.

A more detailed description of the DEM formats may be found in the USGS
publication titled "Digital Elevation Models Data Users Guide 1".

			Sample DEM Type A Logical Record
		Tooele, UT Quadrangle (East Half) (1 degree) 
	----------------------------------------------------------
TOOELE - E                       UT             NK12-10E                                                                                             1     1     0     0   0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                     0.0                       3     2     4  -0.406800000000000D+06   0.144000000000000D+06  -0.406800000000000D+06   0.147600000000000D+06  -0.403200000000000D+06   0.147600000000000D+06  -0.403200000000000D+06   0.144000000000000D+06   0.126500000000000D+04   0.333600000000000D+04   0.0                       10.300000E+010.300000E+010.100000E+01     1  1201
	----------------------------------------------------------

  Data
  Element   Content               Explanation

  1         TOOELE...    Quadrangle name field (144 characters); TOOELE - E
                         is the designation for the DEM covering the east half
                         of the Tooele, Utah sheet.

  2         1            DEM level code; 3 reflects processing by DMA which
                         includes registration to planimetric features   
                         appearing on the source 1-degree.

  3         1            Pattern code; 1 indicates a regular elevation
                         pattern.

  4         0            Planimetric reference system code; 0 indicates
                         geographic coordinate system.

  5         0            Zone code; there are no zones in the geographic
                         system.  Therefore, the zone code is set to zero.

  6         0.0          Map projection parameters; all 15 fields are set to 
       (15 sets of 0.0)  zero for the geographic system and should be ignored.
                         Presence of non-zero parameters are not related to
                         the geographic coordinate system and should also be
                         ignored.

  7         3            Units code; 3 represents arc-seconds as the unit of
                         measure for ground planimetric coordinates throughout
                         the file.

  8         2            Units code; 2 represents meters as the unit of
                         measure for elevation coordinates throughout the
                         file.

  9         4            Number (n) of sides in the polygon which defines the
                         coverage of the DEM file (usually equal to 4).

  10        -0.4068...D+06    A 4,2 array containing the ground coordinates of
             0.1440...D+06    the four corners of the DEM.  In this case
             ........         translation from arc-seconds to degrees, minutes
             ........         and seconds yields: -113 00 0, 40 00 00; -113 00
            -0.4032...D+06    00, 41 00 00; -112 00 00, 41 00 00; -112 00 00.
             0.1440...D+06    40 00 00. 

  11         0.1265...D+04    Minimum and maximum elevations for the DEM.
             0.3336...D+04

  12         0.0              Counterclockwise angle from the primary axis of
                              ground planimetric referenced to the primary
                              axis of the DEM local reference system.

  13         1                Accuracy code; 1 indicates that accuracy 
                              information exists and that a type C record will
                              follow.

  14         0.300000E+01     A three-element containing DEM spatial      
             0.300000E+01     resolution (x,y, z); set to 3, 3, 1; or 3, 6, 1;
             0.100000E+01     or 3, 9, 1 depending on the latitude of the 
                              product.

  15         1  1201          A two-element array containing the number of
                              rows and columns of profiles in the DEM.  The
                              row value m is usually set to 1 as an indication
                              that the arrays are actually one-dimensional
                              profiles.  The column value n set to 1,201
                              indicates that the DEM file consists of a total
                              of 1,201 profiles.

  Padded to 1024 bytes with blanks



			Sample DEM Type B Logical Record
		Tooele, UT Quadrangle (East Half) (1 degree) 
	----------------------------------------------------------
     1     1  1201     1  -0.406800000000000D+06   0.144000000000000D+06   0.0                     0.129800000000000D+04   0.207000000000000D+04  1353  1361  1361  1366  1365  1363  1355  1359  ...
	----------------------------------------------------------

  Data
  Element   Content               Explanation

  1         1 1               Row and column identification number of the
                              profile contained in this record; 1, 1
                              represents row 1, column 1, in the DEM data set.

  2         1201 1            Number of rows (elevations) and columns in this
                              profile; 1201, 1 indicates there are 1,201
                              elevations and 1 column in this profile.

  3        -0.4068...D+06     Translated to the decimal, -406800.0 and
            0.1440...D+06     144000.0 are the ground planimetric coordinates
                              (arc-seconds) of the first elevation in the
                              profile, thus computed equal to -113 and 40
                              degrees.

  4         0.0               Elevation of local datum for the profile.
                              Always zero for 1-degree DEM, the reference is
                              mean sea level.

  5         0.1298...D+04     Minimum and maximum elevations for the profile.
            0.2070...D+04

  6         1353  1361...     An array of m x n elevations (m=1201, n=1) for
                              the profile expressed in units of measure of
                              meters (record A, element 8, indicates meters
                              as units of measure) above or below the local
                              datum (record A, element 4).

  Padded to a multiple of 1024 bytes with blanks



			Sample DEM Type C Logical Record
		Tooele, UT Quadrangle (East Half) (1 degree) 
	----------------------------------------------------------
     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0    26     0
	----------------------------------------------------------

                       Type       Physical Record Format
  Data               (FORTRAN    ASCII  Starting  Ending    Comment
  Element            Notation)   Format   byte     byte

1  Code indicating   INTEGER*2    16       1        6    Code 1 - available
   availability of                                            0 - unavailable
   statistics in
   data element 2

2  RMSE of file's    INTEGER*2    3I6      7       24    In some units as
   datum relative                                        indicated by elements
   to absolute                                           8 and 9 of logical
   datum (x, y, z)                                       record type A.

3  Sample size on    INTEGER*3    I6      25       30    If 0, then accuracy
   which statistics                                      will be assumed to be
   in data element                                       estimated rather than
   2 are based                                           computed.

4  Code indicating   INTEGER*2    I6      31       36    Code 1 - available
   availability of                                            0 - unavailable
   statistics in
   data element 5

5  RMSE of DEM       INTEGER*2   3I6      37      54     In same units as
   data relative                                         indicated by elements
   to file's                                             8 and 9 of logical
   datum (x, y, z)                                       record type A.

6  Sample size on    INTEGER*2   I6       55      60     If 0, then accuracy
   which statistics                                      will be assumed to
   in element 5                                          be estimated rather
   are based                                             than computed.

Padded to 1024 bytes with blanks


DEM Accuracy 
============

General Information 
-------------------

The accuracy of a DEM is dependent upon its source and the spatial
resolution, that is grid spacing, of the data profiles. One factor
influencing DEM accuracy is source data scale and resolution. A dependency
exists between the scale of the source materials and the level of grid
refinement possible. The source resolution is also a factor in determining
the level of content that may be extracted during digitization. For
example, 1:250,000-scale topographic maps are the primary source of
1-degree DEM's.

Another factor is the horizontal and vertical dimension of the
DEM. Horizontal accuracy of DEM data is dependent upon the horizontal
spacing of the elevation matrix. Within a standard DEM, most terrain
features are generalized by being reduced to grid nodes spaced at regular
intersections in the horizontal plane. This generalization reduces the
ability to recover positions of specific features less than the internal
spacing during testing and results in a de facto filtering or smoothing of
the surface during gridding.

Vertical accuracy of DEM data is dependent upon the spatial resolution
(horizontal grid spacing), quality of the source data, collection and
processing procedures, and digitizing systems. As with horizontal accuracy,
the entire process, beginning with project authorization, compilation of
the source data sets, and the final gridding process, must satisfy accuracy
criteria customarily applied to each system. Each source data set must
qualify to be used in the next step of the process. Errors have the effect
of compounding for each step of the process.  Production personnel are
directed to account for each production step leading to the final DEM.

1-Degree DEM Accuracy 
---------------------

The broad DMA production objective for a 1-degree DTED-1 is to satisfy an
absolute horizontal accuracy (feature to datum) of 130 m, circular error at
90-percent probability; and an absolute vertical accuracy (feature to mean
sea level) of + or - 30m, linear error at 90-percent probability. The
relative horizontal and vertical accuracy (feature to feature on the
surface of the elevation model), although not specified, will in many cases
conform to the actual hypsographic features with higher integrity than
indicated by the absolute accuracy.
